gen3.org - operator docs etl gitops (#149)
uc-cdis/gen3.org: content/resources/operator/_index.md

	- my_program-TEST1_name3_downloader
	- my_program-TEST1_name4_downloader
```

## 8. ETL and Data Explorer Configurations

> ETL stands for “extract, transform, load” and refers to the process of moving data from the PostgreSQL database (graph model) to the ElasticSearch database (flat model), which is carried out by the Gen3 Framework Service [Tube](https://github.com/uc-cdis/tube).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ETL stands for “extract, transform, load”. In Gen3, it refers to the process of moving data from the PostgreSQL database (graph model) to the ElasticSearch database (flat model), which is carried out by the Gen3 Framework Service [Tube](https://github.com/uc-cdis/tube).
```

> ETL stands for “extract, transform, load”. In Gen3, it refers to the process of moving data from the PostgreSQL database (graph model) to the ElasticSearch database (flat model), which is carried out by the Gen3 Framework Service [Tube](https://github.com/uc-cdis/tube).

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if Tube is one of Gen3 Framework Service (G3FS). I think only a couple of serives (fence, arborist, indexd, sheepdog, etc.) are G3FS

I would just say "Gen3 service Tube"

> Newly ingested data to the Sheepdog Service can be queried immediately via [Peregrine](https://github.com/uc-cdis/peregrine), but not on the Data Explorer, which is powered by [Guppy](https://github.com/uc-cdis/guppy) on the backend.  During the ETL process, Tube will populate ElasticSearch indices and Guppy makes the ElasticSearch indices available for queries for the Data Explorer.

Reviewer 2: minor: why sheepdog doesn't have a link to its repo? 😛

> In practice, Guppy/Tube need to be configured to the ElasticSearch indices in the manifest.json (both in the [versions block](https://github.com/uc-cdis/cdis-manifest/blob/6bc0dc84bec2af7d7971d2a4342319b225728969/gen3.datacommons.io/manifest.json#L23) and the [guppy block for the indices](https://github.com/uc-cdis/guppy#configurations)) and the [ETLmapping.yaml file](https://github.com/uc-cdis/tube/blob/master/docs/configuration_file.md) has to be configured to list those indices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In practice, Guppy needs to be configured with the ElasticSearch indices in the manifest.json (version in the [versions block](https://github.com/uc-cdis/cdis-manifest/blob/6bc0dc84bec2af7d7971d2a4342319b225728969/gen3.datacommons.io/manifest.json#L23) and indices in the [guppy block](https://github.com/uc-cdis/guppy#configurations)) and the [etlMapping.yaml file](https://github.com/uc-cdis/tube/blob/master/docs/configuration_file.md) has to be configured to list those indices.
```

> In practice, Guppy/Tube need to be configured with the ElasticSearch indices in the manifest.json (versions in the [versions block](https://github.com/uc-cdis/cdis-manifest/blob/6bc0dc84bec2af7d7971d2a4342319b225728969/gen3.datacommons.io/manifest.json#L23) and indices in the [guppy block](https://github.com/uc-cdis/guppy#configurations)) and the [etlMapping.yaml file](https://github.com/uc-cdis/tube/blob/master/docs/configuration_file.md) has to be configured to list those indices.

Reviewer 2: we should also mention that `aws-es-proxy` is usually needed in this case althought it is not a Gen3 service, unless you can provide a customized endpoint to access ES

> Note that configuring the ETLmapping.yaml is dependent on what users want to display on the Explorer page (i.e. File & Data tab) and needs to match to the Data Dictionary. The ETLmapping.yaml can be validated against the Data Dictionary as described [here](https://github.com/uc-cdis/gen3utils#etlmappingyaml-validation).

Reviewer: `ETLmapping.yaml` => `etlMapping.yaml` in these 2 paragraphs

Reviewer: `(i.e. File & Data tab)` => we explorer is not limited to these 2 hardcoded tabs anymore, so this say be a bit misleading

> After configuring ETLmapping.yaml, indices need to be created, cleaned, or/and re-populated using commands as described [here](https://github.com/uc-cdis/cloud-automation/tree/master/kube/services/tube) or [here](https://github.com/uc-cdis/tube).

Reviewer: i think https://github.com/uc-cdis/cloud-automation/tree/master/kube/services/tube is outdated, we don't deploy/roll the `tube` service anymore. i think in this sentence you could say something like this instead:
`[...] using the "gen3 gitops configmaps" command to read the new etlMapping.yaml, and the "gen3 job run etl" command to run the ETL`
(or we could update that cloud-automation doc)

And i would remove the 2nd link because i don't see instructions on which commands to run in the `tube` repo

> In the next step, the [gitops.json](https://github.com/uc-cdis/data-portal/blob/master/docs/portal_config.md) needs to be configured to display and populate the indices of interest in the Data Explorer. Remember that only the properties occurring in the ETLmapping.yaml can be brought into the gitops.json. The gitops.json can be [tested locally](https://github.com/uc-cdis/data-portal#local-development-and-devhtml) and [validated against the Data Dictionary](https://github.com/uc-cdis/gen3utils#portal-configuration-gitopsjson-validation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next step, the [gitops.json](https://github.com/uc-cdis/data-portal/blob/master/docs/portal_config.md) needs to be configured to display and populate the indices of interest in the Data Explorer. Remember that only the properties occurring in the ETLmapping.yaml can be brought into the gitops.json. The gitops.json can be [tested locally](https://github.com/uc-cdis/data-portal#local-development-and-devhtml) and [validated against the Data Dictionary and etlMapping.yaml file](https://github.com/uc-cdis/gen3utils#portal-configuration-gitopsjson-validation).
```
